GENESIS
1:1 In the beginning, when God created the heavens and the earth—
1:2 and the earth was without form or shape, with darkness over the abyss and a mighty wind sweeping over the waters—
1:3 Then God said: Let there be light, and there was light.
1:4 God saw that the light was good. God then separated the light from the darkness.
1:5 God called the light day, and the darkness he called night. Evening came, and morning followed—the first day.
1:6 Then God said: Let there be a dome in the middle of the waters, to separate one body of water from the other.
1:7 God made the dome, and it separated the water below the dome from the water above the dome. And so it happened.
1:8 God called the dome sky. Evening came, and morning followed—the second day.
1:9 Then God said: Let the water under the sky be gathered into a single basin, so that the dry land may appear. And so it happened: the water under the sky was gathered into its basin, and the dry land appeared.
1:10 God called the dry land earth, and the basin of water he called sea. God saw that it was good.
1:11 Then God said: Let the earth bring forth vegetation: every kind of plant that bears seed and every kind of fruit tree on earth that bears fruit with its seed in it. And so it happened:
1:12 the earth brought forth vegetation: every kind of plant that bears seed and every kind of fruit tree that bears fruit with its seed in it. God saw that it was good.
1:13 Evening came, and morning followed—the third day.
1:14 Then God said: Let there be lights in the dome of the sky, to separate day from night. Let them mark the seasons, the days and the years,
1:15 and serve as lights in the dome of the sky, to illuminate the earth. And so it happened:
1:16 God made the two great lights, the greater one to govern the day, and the lesser one to govern the night, and the stars.
1:17 God set them in the dome of the sky, to illuminate the earth,
1:18 to govern the day and the night, and to separate the light from the darkness. God saw that it was good.
1:19 Evening came, and morning followed—the fourth day.
1:20 Then God said: Let the water teem with an abundance of living creatures, and on the earth let birds fly beneath the dome of the sky.
1:21 God created the great sea monsters and all kinds of crawling living creatures with which the water teems, and all kinds of winged birds. God saw that it was good,
1:22 and God blessed them, saying: Be fertile, multiply, and fill the water of the seas; and let the birds multiply on the earth.
1:23 Evening came, and morning followed—the fifth day.
1:24 Then God said: Let the earth bring forth every kind of living creature: tame animals, crawling things, and every kind of wild animal. And so it happened:
1:25 God made every kind of wild animal, every kind of tame animal, and every kind of thing that crawls on the ground. God saw that it was good.
1:26 Then God said: Let us make human beings in our image, after our likeness. Let them have dominion over the fish of the sea, the birds of the air, the tame animals, all the wild animals, and all the creatures that crawl on the earth.
1:27 God created mankind in his image; in the image of God he created them; male and female he created them.
1:28 God blessed them and God said to them: Be fertile and multiply; fill the earth and subdue it. Have dominion over the fish of the sea, the birds of the air, and all the living things that crawl on the earth.
1:29 God also said: See, I give you every seed-bearing plant on all the earth and every tree that has seed-bearing fruit on it to be your food;
1:30 and to all the wild animals, all the birds of the air, and all the living creatures that crawl on the earth, I give all the green plants for food. And so it happened.
1:31 God looked at everything he had made, and found it very good. Evening came, and morning followed—the sixth day.
2:1 Thus the heavens and the earth and all their array were completed.
2:2 On the seventh day God completed the work he had been doing; he rested on the seventh day from all the work he had undertaken.
2:3 God blessed the seventh day and made it holy, because on it he rested from all the work he had done in creation.
2:4 This is the story of the heavens and the earth at their creation. When the God made the earth and the heavens—
2:5 there was no field shrub on earth and no grass of the field had sprouted, for the God had sent no rain upon the earth and there was no man to till the ground,
2:6 but a stream was welling up out of the earth and watering all the surface of the ground—
2:7 then the God formed the man out of the dust of the ground and blew into his nostrils the breath of life, and the man became a living being.
2:8 The God planted a garden in Eden, in the east, and placed there the man whom he had formed.
2:9 Out of the ground the God made grow every tree that was delightful to look at and good for food, with the tree of life in the middle of the garden and the tree of the knowledge of good and evil.
2:10 A river rises in Eden to water the garden; beyond there it divides and becomes four branches.
2:11 The name of the first is the Pishon; it is the one that winds through the whole land of Havilah, where there is gold.
2:12 The gold of that land is good; bdellium and lapis lazuli are also there.
2:13 The name of the second river is the Gihon; it is the one that winds all through the land of Cush.
2:14 The name of the third river is the Tigris; it is the one that flows east of Asshur. The fourth river is the Euphrates.
2:15 The God then took the man and settled him in the garden of Eden, to cultivate and care for it.
2:16 The God gave the man this order: You are free to eat from any of the trees of the garden
2:17 except the tree of knowledge of good and evil. From that tree you shall not eat; when you eat from it you shall die.
2:18 The God said: It is not good for the man to be alone. I will make a helper suited to him.
2:19 So the God formed out of the ground all the wild animals and all the birds of the air, and he brought them to the man to see what he would call them; whatever the man called each living creature was then its name.
2:20 The man gave names to all the tame animals, all the birds of the air, and all the wild animals; but none proved to be a helper suited to the man.
2:21 So the God cast a deep sleep on the man, and while he was asleep, he took out one of his ribs and closed up its place with flesh.
2:22 The God then built the rib that he had taken from the man into a woman. When he brought her to the man,
2:23 the man said: This one, at last, is bone of my bones and flesh of my flesh; This one shall be called woman, for out of man this one has been taken.
2:24 That is why a man leaves his father and mother and clings to his wife, and the two of them become one body.
2:25 The man and his wife were both naked, yet they felt no shame.
3:1 Now the snake was the most cunning of all the wild animals that the God had made. He asked the woman, Did God really say, You shall not eat from any of the trees in the garden?
3:2 The woman answered the snake: We may eat of the fruit of the trees in the garden;
3:3 it is only about the fruit of the tree in the middle of the garden that God said, You shall not eat it or even touch it, or else you will die.
3:4 But the snake said to the woman: You certainly will not die!
3:5 God knows well that when you eat of it your eyes will be opened and you will be like gods, who know good and evil.
3:6 The woman saw that the tree was good for food and pleasing to the eyes, and the tree was desirable for gaining wisdom. So she took some of its fruit and ate it; and she also gave some to her husband, who was with her, and he ate it.
3:7 Then the eyes of both of them were opened, and they knew that they were naked; so they sewed fig leaves together and made loincloths for themselves.
3:8 When they heard the sound of the God walking about in the garden at the breezy time of the day, the man and his wife hid themselves from the God among the trees of the garden.
3:9 The God then called to the man and asked him: Where are you?
3:10 He answered, I heard you in the garden; but I was afraid, because I was naked, so I hid.
3:11 Then God asked: Who told you that you were naked? Have you eaten from the tree of which I had forbidden you to eat?
3:12 The man replied, The woman whom you put here with me—she gave me fruit from the tree, so I ate it.
3:13 The God then asked the woman: What is this you have done? The woman answered, The snake tricked me, so I ate it.
3:14 Then the God said to the snake: Because you have done this, cursed are you among all the animals, tame or wild; On your belly you shall crawl, and dust you shall eat all the days of your life.
3:15 I will put enmity between you and the woman, and between your offspring and hers; They will strike at your head, while you strike at their heel.
3:16 To the woman he said: I will intensify your toil in childbearing; in pain you shall bring forth children. Yet your urge shall be for your husband, and he shall rule over you.
3:17 To the man he said: Because you listened to your wife and ate from the tree about which I commanded you, You shall not eat from it, Cursed is the ground because of you! In toil you shall eat its yield all the days of your life.
3:18 Thorns and thistles it shall bear for you, and you shall eat the grass of the field.
3:19 By the sweat of your brow you shall eat bread, Until you return to the ground, from which you were taken; For you are dust, and to dust you shall return.
3:20 The man gave his wife the name Eve, because she was the mother of all the living.
3:21 The God made for the man and his wife garments of skin, with which he clothed them.
3:22 Then the God said: See! The man has become like one of us, knowing good and evil! Now, what if he also reaches out his hand to take fruit from the tree of life, and eats of it and lives forever?
3:23 The God therefore banished him from the garden of Eden, to till the ground from which he had been taken.
3:24 He expelled the man, stationing the cherubim and the fiery revolving sword east of the garden of Eden, to guard the way to the tree of life.
4:1 The man had intercourse with his wife Eve, and she conceived and gave birth to Cain, saying, I have produced a male child with the help of the .
4:2 Next she gave birth to his brother Abel. Abel became a herder of flocks, and Cain a tiller of the ground.
4:3 In the course of time Cain brought an offering to the from the fruit of the ground,
4:4 while Abel, for his part, brought the fatty portion of the firstlings of his flock. The looked with favor on Abel and his offering,
4:5 but on Cain and his offering he did not look with favor. So Cain was very angry and dejected.
4:6 Then the said to Cain: Why are you angry? Why are you dejected?
4:7 If you act rightly, you will be accepted; but if not, sin lies in wait at the door: its urge is for you, yet you can rule over it.
4:8 Cain said to his brother Abel, Let us go out in the field. When they were in the field, Cain attacked his brother Abel and killed him.
4:9 Then the asked Cain, Where is your brother Abel? He answered, I do not know. Am I my brothers keeper?
4:10 God then said: What have you done? Your brothers blood cries out to me from the ground!
4:11 Now you are banned from the ground that opened its mouth to receive your brothers blood from your hand.
4:12 If you till the ground, it shall no longer give you its produce. You shall become a constant wanderer on the earth.
4:13 Cain said to the : My punishment is too great to bear.
4:14 Look, you have now banished me from the ground. I must avoid you and be a constant wanderer on the earth. Anyone may kill me at sight.
4:15 Not so! the said to him. If anyone kills Cain, Cain shall be avenged seven times. So the put a mark on Cain, so that no one would kill him at sight.
4:16 Cain then left the s presence and settled in the land of Nod, east of Eden.
4:17 Cain had intercourse with his wife, and she conceived and bore Enoch. Cain also became the founder of a city, which he named after his son Enoch.
4:18 To Enoch was born Irad, and Irad became the father of Mehujael; Mehujael became the father of Methusael, and Methusael became the father of Lamech.
4:19 Lamech took two wives; the name of the first was Adah, and the name of the second Zillah.
4:20 Adah gave birth to Jabal, who became the ancestor of those who dwell in tents and keep livestock.
4:21 His brothers name was Jubal, who became the ancestor of all who play the lyre and the reed pipe.
4:22 Zillah, on her part, gave birth to Tubalcain, the ancestor of all who forge instruments of bronze and iron. The sister of Tubalcain was Naamah.
4:23 Lamech said to his wives: Adah and Zillah, hear my voice; wives of Lamech, listen to my utterance: I have killed a man for wounding me, a young man for bruising me.
4:24 If Cain is avenged seven times, then Lamech seventy-seven times.
4:25 Adam again had intercourse with his wife, and she gave birth to a son whom she called Seth. God has granted me another offspring in place of Abel, she said, because Cain killed him.
4:26 To Seth, in turn, a son was born, and he named him Enosh. At that time people began to invoke the by name.
5:1 This is the record of the descendants of Adam. When God created human beings, he made them in the likeness of God;
5:2 he created them male and female. When they were created, he blessed them and named them humankind.
5:3 Adam was one hundred and thirty years old when he begot a son in his likeness, after his image; and he named him Seth.
5:4 Adam lived eight hundred years after he begot Seth, and he had other sons and daughters.
5:5 The whole lifetime of Adam was nine hundred and thirty years; then he died.
5:6 When Seth was one hundred and five years old, he begot Enosh.
5:7 Seth lived eight hundred and seven years after he begot Enosh, and he had other sons and daughters.
5:8 The whole lifetime of Seth was nine hundred and twelve years; then he died.
5:9 When Enosh was ninety years old, he begot Kenan.
5:10 Enosh lived eight hundred and fifteen years after he begot Kenan, and he had other sons and daughters.
5:11 The whole lifetime of Enosh was nine hundred and five years; then he died.
5:12 When Kenan was seventy years old, he begot Mahalalel.
5:13 Kenan lived eight hundred and forty years after he begot Mahalalel, and he had other sons and daughters.
5:14 The whole lifetime of Kenan was nine hundred and ten years; then he died.
5:15 When Mahalalel was sixty-five years old, he begot Jared.
5:16 Mahalalel lived eight hundred and thirty years after he begot Jared, and he had other sons and daughters.
5:17 The whole lifetime of Mahalalel was eight hundred and ninety-five years; then he died.
5:18 When Jared was one hundred and sixty-two years old, he begot Enoch.
5:19 Jared lived eight hundred years after he begot Enoch, and he had other sons and daughters.
5:20 The whole lifetime of Jared was nine hundred and sixty-two years; then he died.
5:21 When Enoch was sixty-five years old, he begot Methuselah.
5:22 Enoch walked with God after he begot Methuselah for three hundred years, and he had other sons and daughters.
5:23 The whole lifetime of Enoch was three hundred and sixty-five years.
5:24 Enoch walked with God, and he was no longer here, for God took him.
5:25 When Methuselah was one hundred and eighty-seven years old, he begot Lamech.
5:26 Methuselah lived seven hundred and eighty-two years after he begot Lamech, and he had other sons and daughters.
5:27 The whole lifetime of Methuselah was nine hundred and sixty-nine years; then he died.
5:28 When Lamech was one hundred and eighty-two years old, he begot a son
5:29 and named him Noah, saying, This one shall bring us relief from our work and the toil of our hands, out of the very ground that the has put under a curse.
5:30 Lamech lived five hundred and ninety-five years after he begot Noah, and he had other sons and daughters.
5:31 The whole lifetime of Lamech was seven hundred and seventy-seven years; then he died.
5:32 When Noah was five hundred years old, he begot Shem, Ham, and Japheth.
6:1 When human beings began to grow numerous on the earth and daughters were born to them,
6:2 the sons of God saw how beautiful the daughters of human beings were, and so they took for their wives whomever they pleased.
6:3 Then the said: My spirit shall not remain in human beings forever, because they are only flesh. Their days shall comprise one hundred and twenty years.
6:4 The Nephilim appeared on earth in those days, as well as later, after the sons of God had intercourse with the daughters of human beings, who bore them sons. They were the heroes of old, the men of renown.
6:5 When the saw how great the wickedness of human beings was on earth, and how every desire that their heart conceived was always nothing but evil,
6:6 the regretted making human beings on the earth, and his heart was grieved.
6:7 So the said: I will wipe out from the earth the human beings I have created, and not only the human beings, but also the animals and the crawling things and the birds of the air, for I regret that I made them.
6:8 But Noah found favor with the .
6:9 These are the descendants of Noah. Noah was a righteous man and blameless in his generation; Noah walked with God.
6:10 Noah begot three sons: Shem, Ham, and Japheth.
6:11 But the earth was corrupt in the view of God and full of lawlessness.
6:12 When God saw how corrupt the earth had become, since all mortals had corrupted their ways on earth,
6:13 God said to Noah: I see that the end of all mortals has come, for the earth is full of lawlessness because of them. So I am going to destroy them with the earth.
6:14 Make yourself an ark of gopherwood, equip the ark with various compartments, and cover it inside and out with pitch.
6:15 This is how you shall build it: the length of the ark will be three hundred cubits, its width fifty cubits, and its height thirty cubits.
6:16 Make an opening for daylight and finish the ark a cubit above it. Put the arks entrance on its side; you will make it with bottom, second and third decks.
6:17 I, on my part, am about to bring the flood waters on the earth, to destroy all creatures under the sky in which there is the breath of life; everything on earth shall perish.
6:18 I will establish my covenant with you. You shall go into the ark, you and your sons, your wife and your sons wives with you.
6:19 Of all living creatures you shall bring two of every kind into the ark, one male and one female, to keep them alive along with you.
6:20 Of every kind of bird, of every kind of animal, and of every kind of thing that crawls on the ground, two of each will come to you, that you may keep them alive.
6:21 Moreover, you are to provide yourself with all the food that is to be eaten, and store it away, that it may serve as provisions for you and for them.
6:22 Noah complied; he did just as God had commanded him.
7:1 Then the said to Noah: Go into the ark, you and all your household, for you alone in this generation have I found to be righteous before me.
7:2 Of every clean animal, take with you seven pairs, a male and its mate; and of the unclean animals, one pair, a male and its mate;
7:3 likewise, of every bird of the air, seven pairs, a male and a female, to keep their progeny alive over all the earth.
7:4 For seven days from now I will bring rain down on the earth for forty days and forty nights, and so I will wipe out from the face of the earth every being that I have made.
7:5 Noah complied, just as the had commanded.
7:6 Noah was six hundred years old when the flood came upon the earth.
7:7 Together with his sons, his wife, and his sons wives, Noah went into the ark because of the waters of the flood.
7:8 Of the clean animals and the unclean, of the birds, and of everything that crawls on the ground,
7:9 two by two, male and female came to Noah into the ark, just as God had commanded him.
7:10 When the seven days were over, the waters of the flood came upon the earth.
7:11 In the six hundredth year of Noahs life, in the second month, on the seventeenth day of the month: on that day All the fountains of the great abyss burst forth, and the floodgates of the sky were opened.
7:12 For forty days and forty nights heavy rain poured down on the earth.
7:13 On the very same day, Noah and his sons Shem, Ham, and Japheth, and Noahs wife, and the three wives of Noahs sons had entered the ark,
7:14 together with every kind of wild animal, every kind of tame animal, every kind of crawling thing that crawls on the earth, and every kind of bird.
7:15 Pairs of all creatures in which there was the breath of life came to Noah into the ark.
7:16 Those that entered were male and female; of all creatures they came, as God had commanded Noah. Then the shut him in.
7:17 The flood continued upon the earth for forty days. As the waters increased, they lifted the ark, so that it rose above the earth.
7:18 The waters swelled and increased greatly on the earth, but the ark floated on the surface of the waters.
7:19 Higher and higher on the earth the waters swelled, until all the highest mountains under the heavens were submerged.
7:20 The waters swelled fifteen cubits higher than the submerged mountains.
7:21 All creatures that moved on earth perished: birds, tame animals, wild animals, and all that teemed on the earth, as well as all humankind.
7:22 Everything on dry land with the breath of life in its nostrils died.
7:23 The wiped out every being on earth: human beings and animals, the crawling things and the birds of the air; all were wiped out from the earth. Only Noah and those with him in the ark were left.
7:24 And when the waters had swelled on the earth for one hundred and fifty days,
8:1 God remembered Noah and all the animals, wild and tame, that were with him in the ark. So God made a wind sweep over the earth, and the waters began to subside.
8:2 The fountains of the abyss and the floodgates of the sky were closed, and the downpour from the sky was held back.
8:3 Gradually the waters receded from the earth. At the end of one hundred and fifty days, the waters had so diminished
8:4 that, in the seventh month, on the seventeenth day of the month, the ark came to rest on the mountains of Ararat.
8:5 The waters continued to diminish until the tenth month, and on the first day of the tenth month the tops of the mountains appeared.
8:6 At the end of forty days Noah opened the hatch of the ark that he had made,
8:7 and he released a raven. It flew back and forth until the waters dried off from the earth.
8:8 Then he released a dove, to see if the waters had lessened on the earth.
8:9 But the dove could find no place to perch, and it returned to him in the ark, for there was water over all the earth. Putting out his hand, he caught the dove and drew it back to him inside the ark.
8:10 He waited yet seven days more and again released the dove from the ark.
8:11 In the evening the dove came back to him, and there in its bill was a plucked-off olive leaf! So Noah knew that the waters had diminished on the earth.
8:12 He waited yet another seven days and then released the dove; but this time it did not come back.
8:13 In the six hundred and first year, in the first month, on the first day of the month, the water began to dry up on the earth. Noah then removed the covering of the ark and saw that the surface of the ground had dried.
8:14 In the second month, on the twenty-seventh day of the month, the earth was dry.
8:15 Then God said to Noah:
8:16 Go out of the ark, together with your wife and your sons and your sons wives.
8:17 Bring out with you every living thing that is with you—all creatures, be they birds or animals or crawling things that crawl on the earth—and let them abound on the earth, and be fertile and multiply on it.
8:18 So Noah came out, together with his sons and his wife and his sons wives;
8:19 and all the animals, all the birds, and all the crawling creatures that crawl on the earth went out of the ark by families.
8:20 Then Noah built an altar to the , and choosing from every clean animal and every clean bird, he offered burnt offerings on the altar.
8:21 When the smelled the sweet odor, the said to himself: Never again will I curse the ground because of human beings, since the desires of the human heart are evil from youth; nor will I ever again strike down every living being, as I have done.
8:22 All the days of the earth, seedtime and harvest, cold and heat, Summer and winter, and day and night shall not cease.